 and the moist star, Upon whose influence
Neptune’s empire stands, Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. And
even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still
the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth
together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.

 Re-enter Ghost.

But, soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again! I’ll cross it, though it
blast me. Stay, illusion! If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do
ease, and grace to me, Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy country’s
fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O speak! Or if thou hast
uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For
which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay, and
speak!

 [_The cock crows._]

Stop it, Marcellus!

MARCELLUS. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?

HORATIO. Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO. ’Tis here!

HORATIO. ’Tis here!

 [_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS. ’Tis gone! We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it
the show of violence, For it is as the air, invulnerable, And our vain
blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

HORATIO. And then it started, like a guilty thing Upon a fearful
summons. I have heard The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth
with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and at
his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Th’extravagant
and erring spirit hies To his confine. And of the truth herein This
present object made probation.

MARCELLUS. It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever
’gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning singeth all night long; And then, they say, no
spirit dare stir abroad, The nights are wholesome, then no planets
strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm; So hallow’d and
so gracious is the time.

HORATIO. So have I heard, and do in part believe it. But look, the morn
in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice, Let us impart what we have
seen tonight Unto young Hamlet; for upon my life, This spirit, dumb to
us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As
needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS. Let’s do’t, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall
find him most conveniently.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.

 Enter Claudius King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet, Polonius,
 Laertes, Voltemand, Cornelius, Lords and Attendant.

KING. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be
green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief, and our
whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe; Yet so far hath
discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister,
now our queen, Th’imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as
’twere with a defeated joy, With one auspicious and one dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale
weighing delight and dole, Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr’d
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For
all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras, Holding a
weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brother’s
death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with this
dream of his advantage, He hath not fail’d to pester us with message,
Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all
bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him. Now for
ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we
have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras, Who, impotent and
bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress His
further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists, and full
proportions are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You,
good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand, For bearers of this greeting to old
Norway, Giving to you no further personal power To business with the
King, more than the scope Of these dilated articles allow. Farewell;
and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS and VOLTEMAND. In that, and all things, will we show our
duty.

KING. We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.

 [_Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius._]

And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you? You told us of some suit.
What is’t, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, And lose
your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer,
not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more
instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES. Dread my lord, Your leave and favour to return to France, From
whence though willingly I came to Denmark To show my duty in your
coronation; Yet now I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and
wishes bend again toward France, And bow them to your gracious leave
and pardon.

KING. Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laboursome
petition; and at last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent. I do
beseech you give him leave to go.

KING. Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces
spend it at thy will! But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—

HAMLET. [_Aside._] A little more than kin, and less than kind.

KING. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET. Not so, my lord, I am too much i’ the sun.

QUEEN. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look
like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for
thy noble father in the dust. Thou know’st ’tis common, all that lives
must die, Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET. Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN. If it be, Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET. Seems, madam! Nay, it is; I know not seems. ’Tis not alone my
inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy
suspiration of forc’d breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected haviour of the visage, Together with all forms, moods,
shows of grief, That can denote me truly. These indeed seem, For they
are actions that a man might play; But I have that within which passeth
show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING. ’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these
mourning duties to your father; But you must know, your father lost a
father, That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial
obligation, for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to persevere In
obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly
grief, It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a
mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d; For what we
know must be, and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a
fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason
most absurd, whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath
cried, From the first corse till he that died today, ‘This must be so.’
We pray you throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of
a father; for let the world take note You are the most immediate to our
throne, And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest
father bears his son Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going
back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And
we beseech you bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our
eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet. I pray thee stay
with us; g