ow
dost thou, good lord?’ This might be my lord such-a-one, that praised
my lord such-a-one’s horse when he meant to beg it, might it not?

HORATIO. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. Why, e’en so: and now my Lady Worm’s; chapless, and knocked
about the mazard with a sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we
had the trick to see’t. Did these bones cost no more the breeding but
to play at loggets with ’em? Mine ache to think on’t.

FIRST CLOWN. [_Sings._] A pickaxe and a spade, a spade, For and a
shrouding-sheet; O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is
meet.

 [_Throws up another skull._]

HAMLET. There’s another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and
his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about
the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of
battery? Hum. This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land,
with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his
recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers
vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his
lands will scarcely lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself
have no more, ha?

HORATIO. Not a jot more, my lord.

HAMLET. Is not parchment made of sheep-skins?

HORATIO. Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.

HAMLET. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I
will speak to this fellow.—Whose grave’s this, sir?

FIRST CLOWN. Mine, sir. [_Sings._] O, a pit of clay for to be made For
such a guest is meet.

HAMLET. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in’t.

FIRST CLOWN. You lie out on’t, sir, and therefore ’tis not yours. For
my part, I do not lie in’t, yet it is mine.

HAMLET. Thou dost lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine. ’Tis for
the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

FIRST CLOWN. ’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’t will away again from me to you.

HAMLET. What man dost thou dig it for?

FIRST CLOWN. For no man, sir.

HAMLET. What woman then?

FIRST CLOWN. For none neither.

HAMLET. Who is to be buried in’t?

FIRST CLOWN. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.

HAMLET. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, these three years I
have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe.—How
long hast thou been a grave-maker?

FIRST CLOWN. Of all the days i’ th’ year, I came to’t that day that our
last King Hamlet o’ercame Fortinbras.

HAMLET. How long is that since?

FIRST CLOWN. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
very day that young Hamlet was born,—he that is mad, and sent into
England.

HAMLET. Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

FIRST CLOWN. Why, because he was mad; he shall recover his wits there;
or if he do not, it’s no great matter there.

HAMLET. Why?

FIRST CLOWN. ’Twill not be seen in him there; there the men are as mad
as he.

HAMLET. How came he mad?

FIRST CLOWN. Very strangely, they say.

HAMLET. How strangely?

FIRST CLOWN. Faith, e’en with losing his wits.

HAMLET. Upon what ground?

FIRST CLOWN. Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and
boy, thirty years.

HAMLET. How long will a man lie i’ th’earth ere he rot?

FIRST CLOWN. Faith, if he be not rotten before he die,—as we have many
pocky corses nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in,—he will last
you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine year.

HAMLET. Why he more than another?

FIRST CLOWN. Why, sir, his hide is so tann’d with his trade that he
will keep out water a great while. And your water is a sore decayer of
your whoreson dead body. Here’s a skull now; this skull hath lain in
the earth three-and-twenty years.

HAMLET. Whose was it?

FIRST CLOWN. A whoreson, mad fellow’s it was. Whose do you think it
was?

HAMLET. Nay, I know not.

FIRST CLOWN. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! A pour’d a flagon of
Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the
King’s jester.

HAMLET. This?

FIRST CLOWN. E’en that.

HAMLET. Let me see. [_Takes the skull._] Alas, poor Yorick. I knew him,
Horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath
borne me on his back a thousand times; and now, how abhorred in my
imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that I
have kiss’d I know not how oft. Where be your gibes now? your gambols?
your songs? your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table
on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own grinning? Quite chop-fallen?
Now get you to my lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favour she must come. Make her laugh at that.—Prythee,
Horatio, tell me one thing.

HORATIO. What’s that, my lord?

HAMLET. Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this fashion i’ th’earth?

HORATIO. E’en so.

HAMLET. And smelt so? Pah!

 [_Throws down the skull._]

HORATIO. E’en so, my lord.

HAMLET. To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not
imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it stopping
a bung-hole?

HORATIO. ’Twere to consider too curiously to consider so.

HAMLET. No, faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty
enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus. Alexander died, Alexander
was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he was converted might they
not stop a beer-barrel? Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away. O, that that earth which kept
the world in awe Should patch a wall t’expel the winter’s flaw. But
soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King.

 Enter priests, &c, in procession; the corpse of Ophelia, Laertes and
 Mourners following; King, Queen, their Trains, &c.

The Queen, the courtiers. Who is that they follow? And with such maimed
rites? This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand
Fordo it own life. ’Twas of some estate. Couch we awhile and mark.

 [_Retiring with Horatio._]

LAERTES. What ceremony else?

HAMLET. That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

LAERTES. What ceremony else?

PRIEST. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg’d As we have warranties.
Her death was doubtful; And but that great command o’ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified have lodg’d Till the last trumpet.
For charitable prayers, Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her. Yet here she is allowed her virgin rites, Her maiden strewments,
and the bringing home Of bell and burial.

LAERTES. Must there no more be done?

PRIEST. No more be done. We should profane the service of the dead To
sing sage requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.

LAERTES. Lay her i’ th’earth, And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring. I tell thee, churlish priest, A minist’ring angel
shall my sister be When thou liest howling.

HAMLET. What, the fair Ophelia?

QUEEN. [_Scattering flowers._] Sweets to the sweet. Farewell. I hop’d
thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife; I thought thy bride-bed to
have deck’d, sweet maid, And not have strew’d thy grave.

LAERTES. O, treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursed head Whose
wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Depriv’d thee of. Hold off the
earth a while, Till I have caught her once more in mine arms. [_Leaps
into the grave._] Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of
this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish
head Of blue Olympus.

HAMLET. [_Advancing._] What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis?
whose phrase of so