who should scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity.
The less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS. Come, sirs.

HAMLET. Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play tomorrow.

 [_Exeunt Polonius with all the Players but the First._]

Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play _The Murder of Gonzago_?

FIRST PLAYER. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. We’ll ha’t tomorrow night. You could for a need study a speech
of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in’t,
could you not?

FIRST PLAYER. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.

 [_Exit First Player._]

[_To Rosencrantz and Guildenstern_] My good friends, I’ll leave you
till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ. Good my lord.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

HAMLET. Ay, so, God b’ wi’ ye. Now I am alone. O what a rogue and
peasant slave am I! Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a
fiction, in a dream of passion, Could force his soul so to his own
conceit That from her working all his visage wan’d; Tears in his eyes,
distraction in’s aspect, A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing! For Hecuba? What’s
Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he should weep for her? What would
he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have? He would
drown the stage with tears And cleave the general ear with horrid
speech; Make mad the guilty, and appal the free, Confound the ignorant,
and amaze indeed, The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I, A dull
and muddy-mettled rascal, peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my
cause, And can say nothing. No, not for a king Upon whose property and
most dear life A damn’d defeat was made. Am I a coward? Who calls me
villain, breaks my pate across? Plucks off my beard and blows it in my
face? Tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i’ th’ throat As deep as
to the lungs? Who does me this? Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it: for it
cannot be But I am pigeon-liver’d, and lack gall To make oppression
bitter, or ere this I should have fatted all the region kites With this
slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous,
lecherous, kindless villain! Oh vengeance! Why, what an ass am I! This
is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murder’d, Prompted to
my revenge by heaven and hell, Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with
words And fall a-cursing like a very drab, A scullion! Fie upon’t! Foh!
About, my brain! I have heard That guilty creatures sitting at a play,
Have by the very cunning of the scene, Been struck so to the soul that
presently They have proclaim’d their malefactions. For murder, though
it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. I’ll have
these players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine
uncle. I’ll observe his looks; I’ll tent him to the quick. If he but
blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be the devil,
and the devil hath power T’assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps
Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such
spirits, Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds More relative than
this. The play’s the thing Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the
King.

 [_Exit._]



ACT III

SCENE I. A room in the Castle.

 Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

KING. And can you by no drift of circumstance Get from him why he puts
on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With
turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ. He does confess he feels himself distracted, But from what
cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But with a
crafty madness keeps aloof When we would bring him on to some
confession Of his true state.

QUEEN. Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ. Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN. But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ. Niggard of question, but of our demands, Most free in his
reply.

QUEEN. Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ. Madam, it so fell out that certain players We o’er-raught
on the way. Of these we told him, And there did seem in him a kind of
joy To hear of it. They are about the court, And, as I think, they have
already order This night to play before him.

POLONIUS. ’Tis most true; And he beseech’d me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING. With all my heart; and it doth much content me To hear him so
inclin’d. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his
purpose on to these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ. We shall, my lord.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

KING. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too, For we have closely sent for Hamlet
hither, That he, as ’twere by accident, may here Affront Ophelia. Her
father and myself, lawful espials, Will so bestow ourselves that,
seeing unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by
him, as he is behav’d, If’t be th’affliction of his love or no That
thus he suffers for.

QUEEN. I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That
your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall I
hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your
honours.

OPHELIA. Madam, I wish it may.

 [_Exit Queen._]

POLONIUS. Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you, We will
bestow ourselves.—[_To Ophelia._] Read on this book, That show of such
an exercise may colour Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this,
’Tis too much prov’d, that with devotion’s visage And pious action we
do sugar o’er The devil himself.

KING. [_Aside._] O ’tis too true! How smart a lash that speech doth
give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art,
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most
painted word. O heavy burden!

POLONIUS. I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.

 [_Exeunt King and Polonius._]

 Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET. To be, or not to be, that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler
in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or
to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To
die—to sleep, No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache, and
the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to: ’tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep. To sleep, perchance to
dream—ay, there’s the rub, For in that sleep of death what dreams may
come, When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause.
There’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life. For who would
bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud
man’s contumely, The pangs of dispriz’d love, the law’s delay, The
insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy
takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? Who
would these fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But
that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country, from
whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will, And makes us rather
bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus
conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of
resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And
enterprises of great pith and moment, With this regard their currents
turn awry And lose the name of action. Soft you now, The fair Ophelia!
Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remember’d.

OPHELIA. Good my lord, How does your honour for this many a day?

HAMLET. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.

OPHELIA. My lord, I have remembrances of yours That I have longed long
to re-deliver. I pray you, now receive them.

HAMLET. No, not I. I never gave you aught.

OPHELIA. My honour’d lord, you know right well you did, And with them
words of so sweet breath compos’d As made the things 