gs, Or lose
your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister; And keep you in the rear of
your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid
is prodigal enough If she unmask her beauty to the moon. Virtue itself
scopes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the
spring Too oft before their buttons be disclos’d, And in the morn and
liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary
then, best safety lies in fear. Youth to itself rebels, though none
else near.

OPHELIA. I shall th’effect of this good lesson keep As watchman to my
heart. But good my brother, Do not as some ungracious pastors do, Show
me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whilst like a puff’d and
reckless libertine Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And
recks not his own rede.

LAERTES. O, fear me not. I stay too long. But here my father comes.

 Enter Polonius.

A double blessing is a double grace; Occasion smiles upon a second
leave.

POLONIUS. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame. The wind sits
in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay’d for. There, my
blessing with you.

 [_Laying his hand on Laertes’s head._]

And these few precepts in thy memory Look thou character. Give thy
thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportion’d thought his act. Be thou
familiar, but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their
adoption tried, Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel; But do
not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledg’d
comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in, Bear’t that
th’opposed may beware of thee. Give every man thine ear, but few thy
voice: Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy
habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not
gaudy: For the apparel oft proclaims the man; And they in France of the
best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be: For loan oft loses both itself and
friend; And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to
thine own self be true; And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou
canst not then be false to any man. Farewell: my blessing season this
in thee.

LAERTES. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS. The time invites you; go, your servants tend.

LAERTES. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well What I have said to you.

OPHELIA. ’Tis in my memory lock’d, And you yourself shall keep the key
of it.

LAERTES. Farewell.

 [_Exit._]

POLONIUS. What is’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.

POLONIUS. Marry, well bethought: ’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you; and you yourself Have of your audience been
most free and bounteous. If it be so,—as so ’tis put on me, And that in
way of caution,—I must tell you You do not understand yourself so
clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour. What is between you?
Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders Of his affection
to me.

POLONIUS. Affection! Pooh! You speak like a green girl, Unsifted in
such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call
them?

OPHELIA. I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS. Marry, I’ll teach you; think yourself a baby; That you have
ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling. Tender
yourself more dearly; Or,—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Roaming it thus,—you’ll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA. My lord, he hath importun’d me with love In honourable
fashion.

POLONIUS. Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.

OPHELIA. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost
all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know, When the blood
burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows: these blazes,
daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Even in their
promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at
a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so
much in him that he is young; And with a larger tether may he walk Than
may be given you. In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they
are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere
implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
The better to beguile. This is for all. I would not, in plain terms,
from this time forth Have you so slander any moment leisure As to give
words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look to’t, I charge you; come your
ways.

OPHELIA. I shall obey, my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The platform.

 Enter Hamlet, Horatio and Marcellus.

HAMLET. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO. It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET. What hour now?

HORATIO. I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS. No, it is struck.

HORATIO. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season Wherein
the spirit held his wont to walk.

 [_A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off within._]

What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET. The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail,
and the swaggering upspring reels; And as he drains his draughts of
Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of
his pledge.

HORATIO. Is it a custom?

HAMLET. Ay marry is’t; And to my mind, though I am native here, And to
the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the
observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduc’d and
tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish
phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements,
though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So
oft it chances in particular men That for some vicious mole of nature
in them, As in their birth, wherein they are not guilty, Since nature
cannot choose his origin, By their o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft
breaking down the pales and forts of reason; Or by some habit, that too
much o’erleavens The form of plausive manners;—that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being Nature’s livery or
Fortune’s star,— His virtues else,—be they as pure as grace, As
infinite as man may undergo, Shall in the general censure take
corruption From that particular fault. The dram of evil Doth all the
noble substance often doubt To his own scandal.

HORATIO. Look, my lord, it comes!

 Enter Ghost.

HAMLET. Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of
health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts
from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou com’st in such a
questionable shape That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee Hamlet,
King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance;
but tell Why thy canoniz’d bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their
cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath
op’d his ponderous and marble jaws To cast thee up again! What may this
mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel, Revisit’st thus
the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches
of our souls? Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

 [_Ghost beckons Hamlet._]

HORATIO. It beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment
did desire To you alone.

MARCELLUS. Look with what courteous action It waves you to a more
removed ground. But do not go with it.

HORATIO. No, by no means.

HAMLET. It will not speak; then will I follow it.

HORATIO. Do not, my lord.

HAMLET. Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life at a pin’s
fee; And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal 