iolets, but they wither’d all when my father died. They say he
made a good end. [_Sings._] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

LAERTES. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself She turns to
favour and to prettiness.

OPHELIA. [_Sings._] And will he not come again? And will he not come
again? No, no, he is dead, Go to thy death-bed, He never will come
again.

   His beard was as white as snow, All flaxen was his poll. He is gone,
   he is gone, And we cast away moan. God ha’ mercy on his soul.

And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b’ wi’ ye.

 [_Exit._]

LAERTES. Do you see this, O God?

KING. Laertes, I must commune with your grief, Or you deny me right. Go
but apart, Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will, And they
shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me. If by direct or by collateral
hand They find us touch’d, we will our kingdom give, Our crown, our
life, and all that we call ours To you in satisfaction; but if not, Be
you content to lend your patience to us, And we shall jointly labour
with your soul To give it due content.

LAERTES. Let this be so; His means of death, his obscure burial,— No
trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones, No noble rite, nor formal
ostentation,— Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth, That I
must call’t in question.

KING. So you shall. And where th’offence is let the great axe fall. I
pray you go with me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Another room in the Castle.

 Enter Horatio and a Servant.

HORATIO. What are they that would speak with me?

SERVANT. Sailors, sir. They say they have letters for you.

HORATIO. Let them come in.

 [_Exit Servant._]

I do not know from what part of the world I should be greeted, if not
from Lord Hamlet.

 Enter Sailors.

FIRST SAILOR. God bless you, sir.

HORATIO. Let him bless thee too.

FIRST SAILOR. He shall, sir, and’t please him. There’s a letter for
you, sir. It comes from th’ambassador that was bound for England; if
your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.

HORATIO. [_Reads._] ‘Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this,
give these fellows some means to the King. They have letters for him.
Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment
gave us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a
compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded them. On the instant
they got clear of our ship, so I alone became their prisoner. They have
dealt with me like thieves of mercy. But they knew what they did; I am
to do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters I have sent,
and repair thou to me with as much haste as thou wouldst fly death. I
have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much
too light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for
England: of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell. He that thou
knowest thine, HAMLET.’

Come, I will give you way for these your letters, And do’t the
speedier, that you may direct me To him from whom you brought them.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Another room in the Castle.

 Enter King and Laertes.

KING. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal, And you must put me
in your heart for friend, Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain Pursu’d my life.

LAERTES. It well appears. But tell me Why you proceeded not against
these feats, So crimeful and so capital in nature, As by your safety,
wisdom, all things else, You mainly were stirr’d up.

KING. O, for two special reasons, Which may to you, perhaps, seem much
unsinew’d, But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother Lives
almost by his looks; and for myself,— My virtue or my plague, be it
either which,— She’s so conjunctive to my life and soul, That, as the
star moves not but in his sphere, I could not but by her. The other
motive, Why to a public count I might not go, Is the great love the
general gender bear him, Who, dipping all his faults in their
affection, Would like the spring that turneth wood to stone, Convert
his gyves to graces; so that my arrows, Too slightly timber’d for so
loud a wind, Would have reverted to my bow again, And not where I had
aim’d them.

LAERTES. And so have I a noble father lost, A sister driven into
desperate terms, Whose worth, if praises may go back again, Stood
challenger on mount of all the age For her perfections. But my revenge
will come.

KING. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think That we are
made of stuff so flat and dull That we can let our beard be shook with
danger, And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more. I lov’d your
father, and we love ourself, And that, I hope, will teach you to
imagine—

 Enter a Messenger.

How now? What news?

MESSENGER. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet. This to your Majesty; this to
the Queen.

KING. From Hamlet! Who brought them?

MESSENGER. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not. They were given
me by Claudio. He receiv’d them Of him that brought them.

KING. Laertes, you shall hear them. Leave us.

 [_Exit Messenger._]

[_Reads._] ‘High and mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes. When I
shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasions of my
sudden and more strange return. HAMLET.’

What should this mean? Are all the rest come back? Or is it some abuse,
and no such thing?

LAERTES. Know you the hand?

KING. ’Tis Hamlet’s character. ’Naked!’ And in a postscript here he
says ‘alone.’ Can you advise me?

LAERTES. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come, It warms the very
sickness in my heart That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, ‘Thus
diest thou.’

KING. If it be so, Laertes,— As how should it be so? How otherwise?—
Will you be rul’d by me?

LAERTES. Ay, my lord; So you will not o’errule me to a peace.

KING. To thine own peace. If he be now return’d, As checking at his
voyage, and that he means No more to undertake it, I will work him To
exploit, now ripe in my device, Under the which he shall not choose but
fall; And for his death no wind shall breathe, But even his mother
shall uncharge the practice And call it accident.

LAERTES. My lord, I will be rul’d; The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.

KING. It falls right. You have been talk’d of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality Wherein they say you shine.
Your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that
one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.

LAERTES. What part is that, my lord?

KING. A very riband in the cap of youth, Yet needful too, for youth no
less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled
age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness. Two
months since Here was a gentleman of Normandy,— I’ve seen myself, and
serv’d against, the French, And they can well on horseback, but this
gallant Had witchcraft in’t. He grew unto his seat, And to such
wondrous doing brought his horse, As had he been incorps’d and
demi-natur’d With the brave beast. So far he topp’d my thought That I
in forgery of shapes and tricks, Come short of what he did.

LAERTES. A Norman was’t?

KING. A Norman.

LAERTES. Upon my life, Lamond.

KING. The very same.

LAERTES. I know him well. He is the brooch indeed And gem of all the
nation.

KING. He made confession of you, And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defence, And for your rapier most
especially, That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed If one could
match you. The scrimers of their nation He swore had neither motion,
guard, nor eye, If you oppos’d them. Sir, this report of his Did Hamlet
so envenom with his envy That he could nothing do but wish and beg Your
sudden coming o’er to play with him. Now, out of this,—

LAERTES. Wha