ere has been much to do on both sides; and the
nation holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was for a
while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to
cuffs in the question.

HAMLET. Is’t possible?

GUILDENSTERN. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.

HAMLET. Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ. Ay, that they do, my lord. Hercules and his load too.

HAMLET. It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and
those that would make mouths at him while my father lived, give twenty,
forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy
could find it out.

 [_Flourish of trumpets within._]

GUILDENSTERN. There are the players.

HAMLET. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come. The
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you
in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which I tell you must show
fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You
are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.

GUILDENSTERN. In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly, I
know a hawk from a handsaw.

 Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS. Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET. Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too, at each ear a hearer. That
great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ. Happily he’s the second time come to them; for they say an
old man is twice a child.

HAMLET. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark
it.—You say right, sir: for a Monday morning ’twas so indeed.

POLONIUS. My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET. My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in
Rome—

POLONIUS. The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET. Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS. Upon my honour.

HAMLET. Then came each actor on his ass—

POLONIUS. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene
individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus
too light, for the law of writ and the liberty. These are the only men.

HAMLET. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!

POLONIUS. What treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET. Why— ’One fair daughter, and no more, The which he loved
passing well.’

POLONIUS. [_Aside._] Still on my daughter.

HAMLET. Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
love passing well.

HAMLET. Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS. What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET. Why, As by lot, God wot, and then, you know, It came to pass,
as most like it was. The first row of the pious chanson will show you
more. For look where my abridgement comes.

 Enter four or five Players.

You are welcome, masters, welcome all. I am glad to see thee well.
Welcome, good friends. O, my old friend! Thy face is valanc’d since I
saw thee last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady
and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I
saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you
are all welcome. We’ll e’en to’t like French falconers, fly at anything
we see. We’ll have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST PLAYER. What speech, my lord?

HAMLET. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted, or
if it was, not above once, for the play, I remember, pleased not the
million, ’twas caviare to the general. But it was—as I received it, and
others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an
excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there were no sallets in the
lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that
might indite the author of affectation, but called it an honest method,
as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One
speech in it, I chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter. If it
live in your memory, begin at this line, let me see, let me see: _The
rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast,—_ It is not so: it begins
with Pyrrhus— _The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his
purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous
horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry
more dismal. Head to foot Now is he total gules, horridly trick’d With
blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Bak’d and impasted with the
parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and a damned light To their
vile murders. Roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’ersized with
coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old
grandsire Priam seeks._ So, proceed you.

POLONIUS. ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
discretion.

FIRST PLAYER. _Anon he finds him, Striking too short at Greeks. His
antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to
command. Unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes
wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword Th’unnerved father
falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming
top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner
Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword, Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ th’air to stick. So, as a painted tyrant,
Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the
rack stand still, The bold winds speechless, and the orb below As hush
as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region; so after
Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work, And never did
the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour, forg’d for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out,
out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods, In general synod, take away
her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl
the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends._

POLONIUS. This is too long.

HAMLET. It shall to the barber’s, with your beard.—Prythee say on. He’s
for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER. _But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen,—_

HAMLET. ‘The mobled queen’?

POLONIUS. That’s good! ‘Mobled queen’ is good.

FIRST PLAYER. _Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames With
bisson rheum. A clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and
for a robe, About her lank and all o’erteemed loins, A blanket, in
th’alarm of fear caught up— Who this had seen, with tongue in venom
steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounc’d. But if
the gods themselves did see her then, When she saw Pyrrhus make
malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The
instant burst of clamour that she made,— Unless things mortal move them
not at all,— Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And
passion in the gods._

POLONIUS. Look, where he has not turn’d his colour, and has tears in’s
eyes. Pray you, no more.

HAMLET. ’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.—Good
my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them
be well used; for they are the abstracts and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their
ill report while you live.

POLONIUS. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.

HAMLET. God’s bodikin, man, better. Use every man after his desert, and
