he Duke’s name, his wife
Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’
that? Your majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not. Let
the gall’d jade wince; our withers are unwrung.

 Enter Lucianus.

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.

OPHELIA. You are a good chorus, my lord.

HAMLET. I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the
puppets dallying.

OPHELIA. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

HAMLET. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.

OPHELIA. Still better, and worse.

HAMLET. So you mistake your husbands.—Begin, murderer. Pox, leave thy
damnable faces, and begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.

LUCIANUS. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of
midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice
infected, Thy natural magic and dire property On wholesome life usurp
immediately.

 [_Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears._]

HAMLET. He poisons him i’ th’garden for’s estate. His name’s Gonzago.
The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You shall see
anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.

OPHELIA. The King rises.

HAMLET. What, frighted with false fire?

QUEEN. How fares my lord?

POLONIUS. Give o’er the play.

KING. Give me some light. Away.

All. Lights, lights, lights.

 [_Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio._]

HAMLET. Why, let the strucken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For
some must watch, while some must sleep, So runs the world away. Would
not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, if the rest of my fortunes
turn Turk with me; with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me
a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?

HORATIO. Half a share.

HAMLET. A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm
dismantled was Of Jove himself, and now reigns here A very,
very—pajock.

HORATIO. You might have rhymed.

HAMLET. O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for a thousand
pound. Didst perceive?

HORATIO. Very well, my lord.

HAMLET. Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HORATIO. I did very well note him.

HAMLET. Ah, ha! Come, some music. Come, the recorders. For if the king
like not the comedy, Why then, belike he likes it not, perdie. Come,
some music.

 Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

GUILDENSTERN. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.

HAMLET. Sir, a whole history.

GUILDENSTERN. The King, sir—

HAMLET. Ay, sir, what of him?

GUILDENSTERN. Is in his retirement, marvellous distempered.

HAMLET. With drink, sir?

GUILDENSTERN. No, my lord; rather with choler.

HAMLET. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
the doctor, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him
into far more choler.

GUILDENSTERN. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and
start not so wildly from my affair.

HAMLET. I am tame, sir, pronounce.

GUILDENSTERN. The Queen your mother, in most great affliction of
spirit, hath sent me to you.

HAMLET. You are welcome.

GUILDENSTERN. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right
breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do
your mother’s commandment; if not, your pardon and my return shall be
the end of my business.

HAMLET. Sir, I cannot.

GUILDENSTERN. What, my lord?

HAMLET. Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s diseased. But, sir, such
answer as I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say, my
mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter. My mother, you say,—

ROSENCRANTZ. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
amazement and admiration.

HAMLET. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
sequel at the heels of this mother’s admiration?

ROSENCRANTZ. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to
bed.

HAMLET. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
further trade with us?

ROSENCRANTZ. My lord, you once did love me.

HAMLET. And so I do still, by these pickers and stealers.

ROSENCRANTZ. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do
surely bar the door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to
your friend.

HAMLET. Sir, I lack advancement.

ROSENCRANTZ. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King
himself for your succession in Denmark?

HAMLET. Ay, sir, but while the grass grows—the proverb is something
musty.

 Re-enter the Players with recorders.

O, the recorders. Let me see one.—To withdraw with you, why do you go
about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

GUILDENSTERN. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too
unmannerly.

HAMLET. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?

GUILDENSTERN. My lord, I cannot.

HAMLET. I pray you.

GUILDENSTERN. Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET. I do beseech you.

GUILDENSTERN. I know no touch of it, my lord.

HAMLET. ’Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your finger
and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most
eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.

GUILDENSTERN. But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony. I
have not the skill.

HAMLET. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to
the top of my compass; and there is much music, excellent voice, in
this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. ’Sblood, do you think
I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you
will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me.

 Enter Polonius.

God bless you, sir.

POLONIUS. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.

HAMLET. Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in shape of a camel?

POLONIUS. By the mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.

HAMLET. Methinks it is like a weasel.

POLONIUS. It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET. Or like a whale.

POLONIUS. Very like a whale.

HAMLET. Then will I come to my mother by and by.—They fool me to the
top of my bent.—I will come by and by.

POLONIUS. I will say so.

 [_Exit._]

HAMLET. By and by is easily said. Leave me, friends.

 [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

’Tis now the very witching time of night, When churchyards yawn, and
hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood, And do such bitter business as the day Would quake to look on.
Soft now, to my mother. O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever The
soul of Nero enter this firm bosom: Let me be cruel, not unnatural. I
will speak daggers to her, but use none; My tongue and soul in this be
hypocrites. How in my words somever she be shent, To give them seals
never, my soul, consent.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A room in the Castle.

 Enter King, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

KING. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us To let his madness
range. Therefore prepare you, I your commission will forthwith
dispatch, And he to England shall along with you. The terms of our
estate may not endure Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow Out of his
lunacies.

GUILDENSTERN. We will ourselves provide. Most holy and religious fear
it is To keep those many many bodies safe That live and feed upon your
Majesty.

ROSENCRANTZ. The single and peculiar life is bound With all the
strength and armour of the mind, To keep itself from ’noyance; but much
more That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest The lives of many. The
cease of majesty Dies not alone; but like a gulf doth draw What’s near
it with it. It is a massy wheel Fix’d on the summit of the highest
mount, To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortis’d and
adjoin’d; which when it falls, Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone Did the King sigh, but with a
gener