ing too much of this. There is a play
tonight before the King. One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee, of my father’s death. I prythee, when thou
see’st that act a-foot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe
mine uncle. If his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen; And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet
to his face; And after we will both our judgments join In censure of
his seeming.

HORATIO. Well, my lord. If he steal aught the whilst this play is
playing, And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

HAMLET. They are coming to the play. I must be idle. Get you a place.

 Danish march. A flourish. Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia,
 Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and others.

KING. How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET. Excellent, i’ faith; of the chameleon’s dish: I eat the air,
promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.

KING. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words are not
mine.

HAMLET. No, nor mine now. [_To Polonius._] My lord, you play’d once i’
th’university, you say?

POLONIUS. That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.

HAMLET. What did you enact?

POLONIUS. I did enact Julius Caesar. I was kill’d i’ th’ Capitol.
Brutus killed me.

HAMLET. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
the players ready?

ROSENCRANTZ. Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.

QUEEN. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

HAMLET. No, good mother, here’s metal more attractive.

POLONIUS. [_To the King._] O ho! do you mark that?

HAMLET. Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

 [_Lying down at Ophelia’s feet._]

OPHELIA. No, my lord.

HAMLET. I mean, my head upon your lap?

OPHELIA. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. Do you think I meant country matters?

OPHELIA. I think nothing, my lord.

HAMLET. That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’ legs.

OPHELIA. What is, my lord?

HAMLET. Nothing.

OPHELIA. You are merry, my lord.

HAMLET. Who, I?

OPHELIA. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
within’s two hours.

OPHELIA. Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.

HAMLET. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I’ll have a
suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yet?
Then there’s hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half a
year. But by’r lady, he must build churches then; or else shall he
suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is ‘For, O,
for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!’

 Trumpets sound. The dumb show enters.

_Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing him and he
her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation unto him. He takes her
up, and declines his head upon her neck. Lays him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow,
takes off his crown, kisses it, pours poison in the King’s ears, and
exits. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes passionate
action. The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes, comes in again,
seeming to lament with her. The dead body is carried away. The Poisoner
woos the Queen with gifts. She seems loth and unwilling awhile, but in
the end accepts his love._

 [_Exeunt._]

OPHELIA. What means this, my lord?

HAMLET. Marry, this is miching mallicho; it means mischief.

OPHELIA. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.

 Enter Prologue.

HAMLET. We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel;
they’ll tell all.

OPHELIA. Will they tell us what this show meant?

HAMLET. Ay, or any show that you’ll show him. Be not you ashamed to
show, he’ll not shame to tell you what it means.

OPHELIA. You are naught, you are naught: I’ll mark the play.

PROLOGUE. _For us, and for our tragedy, Here stooping to your clemency,
We beg your hearing patiently._

HAMLET. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?

OPHELIA. ’Tis brief, my lord.

HAMLET. As woman’s love.

 Enter a King and a Queen.

PLAYER KING. Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round Neptune’s
salt wash and Tellus’ orbed ground, And thirty dozen moons with
borrow’d sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been, Since
love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred
bands.

PLAYER QUEEN. So many journeys may the sun and moon Make us again count
o’er ere love be done. But, woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far
from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you. Yet, though
I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear
and love holds quantity, In neither aught, or in extremity. Now what my
love is, proof hath made you know, And as my love is siz’d, my fear is
so. Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear; Where little
fears grow great, great love grows there.

PLAYER KING. Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too: My
operant powers their functions leave to do: And thou shalt live in this
fair world behind, Honour’d, belov’d, and haply one as kind For husband
shalt thou—

PLAYER QUEEN. O confound the rest. Such love must needs be treason in
my breast. In second husband let me be accurst! None wed the second but
who kill’d the first.

HAMLET. [_Aside._] Wormwood, wormwood.

PLAYER QUEEN. The instances that second marriage move Are base respects
of thrift, but none of love. A second time I kill my husband dead, When
second husband kisses me in bed.

PLAYER KING. I do believe you think what now you speak; But what we do
determine, oft we break. Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violent
birth, but poor validity: Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the
tree, But fall unshaken when they mellow be. Most necessary ’tis that
we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt. What to ourselves
in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The
violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves
destroy. Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy
grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye; nor ’tis not
strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change, For ’tis a
question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else
fortune love. The great man down, you mark his favourite flies, The
poor advanc’d makes friends of enemies; And hitherto doth love on
fortune tend: For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in
want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy. But
orderly to end where I begun, Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown. Our thoughts are ours, their
ends none of our own. So think thou wilt no second husband wed, But die
thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

PLAYER QUEEN. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light, Sport and
repose lock from me day and night, To desperation turn my trust and
hope, An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope, Each opposite that
blanks the face of joy, Meet what I would have well, and it destroy!
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife, If, once a widow, ever I
be wife.

HAMLET. [_To Ophelia._] If she should break it now.

PLAYER KING. ’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile. My spirits
grow dull, and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep.
[_Sleeps._]

PLAYER QUEEN. Sleep rock thy brain, And never come mischance between us
twain.

 [_Exit._]

HAMLET. Madam, how like you this play?

QUEEN. The lady protests too much, methinks.

HAMLET. O, but she’ll keep her word.

KING. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in’t?

HAMLET. No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i’ th’
world.

KING. What do you call the play?

HAMLET. _The Mousetrap._ Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the image
of a murder done in Vienna. Gonzago is t