o not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING. Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply. Be as ourself in Denmark.
Madam, come; This gentle and unforc’d accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to
my heart; in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the King’s rouse the
heaven shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.

 [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

HAMLET. O that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve
itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon
’gainst self-slaughter. O God! O God! How weary, stale, flat, and
unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on’t! Oh fie!
’tis an unweeded garden That grows to seed; things rank and gross in
nature Possess it merely. That it should come to this! But two months
dead—nay, not so much, not two: So excellent a king; that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother, That he might not beteem
the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth! Must
I remember? Why, she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had
grown By what it fed on; and yet, within a month— Let me not think
on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman! A little month, or ere those shoes
were old With which she followed my poor father’s body Like Niobe, all
tears.—Why she, even she— O God! A beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourn’d longer,—married with mine uncle, My father’s
brother; but no more like my father Than I to Hercules. Within a month?
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her
galled eyes, She married. O most wicked speed, to post With such
dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

 Enter Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo.

HORATIO. Hail to your lordship!

HAMLET. I am glad to see you well: Horatio, or I do forget myself.

HORATIO. The same, my lord, And your poor servant ever.

HAMLET. Sir, my good friend; I’ll change that name with you: And what
make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?— Marcellus?

MARCELLUS. My good lord.

HAMLET. I am very glad to see you.—Good even, sir.— But what, in faith,
make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO. A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET. I would not hear your enemy say so; Nor shall you do my ear
that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself.
I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? We’ll
teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO. My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.

HAMLET. I prithee do not mock me, fellow-student. I think it was to see
my mother’s wedding.

HORATIO. Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.

HAMLET. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak’d meats Did coldly
furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in
heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father,—methinks I see
my father.

HORATIO. Where, my lord?

HAMLET. In my mind’s eye, Horatio.

HORATIO. I saw him once; he was a goodly king.

HAMLET. He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon
his like again.

HORATIO. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET. Saw? Who?

HORATIO. My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET. The King my father!

HORATIO. Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I
may deliver Upon the witness of these gentlemen This marvel to you.

HAMLET. For God’s love let me hear.

HORATIO. Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and
Barnardo, on their watch In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father, Armed at point
exactly, cap-à-pie, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes
slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and
fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they,
distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb, and speak
not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did, And I with
them the third night kept the watch, Where, as they had deliver’d, both
in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The
apparition comes. I knew your father; These hands are not more like.

HAMLET. But where was this?

MARCELLUS. My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET. Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO. My lord, I did; But answer made it none: yet once methought It
lifted up it head, and did address Itself to motion, like as it would
speak. But even then the morning cock crew loud, And at the sound it
shrunk in haste away, And vanish’d from our sight.

HAMLET. ’Tis very strange.

HORATIO. As I do live, my honour’d lord, ’tis true; And we did think it
writ down in our duty To let you know of it.

HAMLET. Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. Hold you the watch
tonight?

Mar. and BARNARDO. We do, my lord.

HAMLET. Arm’d, say you?

Both. Arm’d, my lord.

HAMLET. From top to toe?

BOTH. My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET. Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO. O yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET. What, look’d he frowningly?

HORATIO. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET. Pale, or red?

HORATIO. Nay, very pale.

HAMLET. And fix’d his eyes upon you?

HORATIO. Most constantly.

HAMLET. I would I had been there.

HORATIO. It would have much amaz’d you.

HAMLET. Very like, very like. Stay’d it long?

HORATIO. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

MARCELLUS and BARNARDO. Longer, longer.

HORATIO. Not when I saw’t.

HAMLET. His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO. It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver’d.

HAMLET. I will watch tonight; Perchance ’twill walk again.

HORATIO. I warrant you it will.

HAMLET. If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though
hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If
you have hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your
silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap tonight, Give it an
understanding, but no tongue. I will requite your loves. So, fare ye
well. Upon the platform ’twixt eleven and twelve, I’ll visit you.

ALL. Our duty to your honour.

HAMLET. Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.

 [_Exeunt Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo._]

My father’s spirit in arms! All is not well; I doubt some foul play:
would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds
will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A room in Polonius’s house.

 Enter Laertes and Ophelia.

LAERTES. My necessaries are embark’d. Farewell. And, sister, as the
winds give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me
hear from you.

OPHELIA. Do you doubt that?

LAERTES. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour, Hold it a fashion
and a toy in blood; A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not
permanent, sweet, not lasting; The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
No more.

OPHELIA. No more but so?

LAERTES. Think it no more. For nature crescent does not grow alone In
thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes, The inward service of the
mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no
soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will; but you must
fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is
subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalu’d persons do, Carve for
himself; for on his choice depends The sanctity and health of this
whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscrib’d Unto the
voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says
he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his
particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your
honour may sustain If with too credent ear you list his son