more rich; their
perfume lost, Take these again; for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax
poor when givers prove unkind. There, my lord.

HAMLET. Ha, ha! Are you honest?

OPHELIA. My lord?

HAMLET. Are you fair?

OPHELIA. What means your lordship?

HAMLET. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
discourse to your beauty.

OPHELIA. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?

HAMLET. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but
now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

OPHELIA. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HAMLET. You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot so inoculate
our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you not.

OPHELIA. I was the more deceived.

HAMLET. Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
sinners? I am myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of
such things that it were better my mother had not borne me. I am very
proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have
thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and
heaven? We are arrant knaves all, believe none of us. Go thy ways to a
nunnery. Where’s your father?

OPHELIA. At home, my lord.

HAMLET. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
nowhere but in’s own house. Farewell.

OPHELIA. O help him, you sweet heavens!

HAMLET. If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague for thy dowry.
Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
calumny. Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell. Or if thou wilt needs
marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you
make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too. Farewell.

OPHELIA. O heavenly powers, restore him!

HAMLET. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath given
you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you amble, and
you lisp, and nickname God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your
ignorance. Go to, I’ll no more on’t, it hath made me mad. I say, we
will have no more marriages. Those that are married already, all but
one, shall live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go.

 [_Exit._]

OPHELIA. O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown! The courtier’s,
soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword, Th’expectancy and rose of the
fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, Th’observ’d of
all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and
wretched, That suck’d the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble
and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled out of tune and
harsh, That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with
ecstasy. O woe is me, T’have seen what I have seen, see what I see.

 Enter King and Polonius.

KING. Love? His affections do not that way tend, Nor what he spake,
though it lack’d form a little, Was not like madness. There’s something
in his soul O’er which his melancholy sits on brood, And I do doubt the
hatch and the disclose Will be some danger, which for to prevent, I
have in quick determination Thus set it down: he shall with speed to
England For the demand of our neglected tribute: Haply the seas and
countries different, With variable objects, shall expel This something
settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him
thus From fashion of himself. What think you on’t?

POLONIUS. It shall do well. But yet do I believe The origin and
commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said, We heard it all. My lord,
do as you please, But if you hold it fit, after the play, Let his queen
mother all alone entreat him To show his grief, let her be round with
him, And I’ll be plac’d, so please you, in the ear Of all their
conference. If she find him not, To England send him; or confine him
where Your wisdom best shall think.

KING. It shall be so. Madness in great ones must not unwatch’d go.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A hall in the Castle.

 Enter Hamlet and certain Players.

HAMLET. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,
trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of your players
do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very
torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, whirlwind of passion, you must
acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it
offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a
passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings,
who, for the most part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing
Termagant. It out-Herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.

FIRST PLAYER. I warrant your honour.

HAMLET. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this
special observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature; for
anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at
the first and now, was and is, to hold as ’twere the mirror up to
nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the
very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now, this
overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot
but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in
your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players
that I have seen play—and heard others praise, and that highly—not to
speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians, nor
the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed
that I have thought some of Nature’s journeymen had made men, and not
made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

FIRST PLAYER. I hope we have reform’d that indifferently with us, sir.

HAMLET. O reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns
speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them that will
themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh
too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then
to be considered. That’s villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.

 [_Exeunt Players._]

 Enter Polonius, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?

POLONIUS. And the Queen too, and that presently.

HAMLET. Bid the players make haste.

 [_Exit Polonius._]

Will you two help to hasten them?

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. We will, my lord.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

HAMLET. What ho, Horatio!

 Enter Horatio.

HORATIO. Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HAMLET. Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation
cop’d withal.

HORATIO. O my dear lord.

HAMLET. Nay, do not think I flatter; For what advancement may I hope
from thee, That no revenue hast, but thy good spirits To feed and
clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter’d? No, let the candied
tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear? Since my dear soul was
mistress of her choice, And could of men distinguish, her election Hath
seal’d thee for herself. For thou hast been As one, in suffering all,
that suffers nothing, A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast
ta’en with equal thanks. And bles’d are those Whose blood and judgment
are so well co-mingled That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finger To
sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s
slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of
heart, As I do thee. Someth