ise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.

 Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

ROSENCRANTZ. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

HAMLET. Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.

ROSENCRANTZ. Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence, And bear
it to the chapel.

HAMLET. Do not believe it.

ROSENCRANTZ. Believe what?

HAMLET. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
demanded of a sponge—what replication should be made by the son of a
king?

ROSENCRANTZ. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

HAMLET. Ay, sir; that soaks up the King’s countenance, his rewards, his
authorities. But such officers do the King best service in the end: he
keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to be
last swallowed: when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but
squeezing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again.

ROSENCRANTZ. I understand you not, my lord.

HAMLET. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.

ROSENCRANTZ. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us
to the King.

HAMLET. The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.
The King is a thing—

GUILDENSTERN. A thing, my lord!

HAMLET. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another room in the Castle.

 Enter King, attended.

KING. I have sent to seek him and to find the body. How dangerous is it
that this man goes loose! Yet must not we put the strong law on him:
He’s lov’d of the distracted multitude, Who like not in their judgment,
but their eyes; And where ’tis so, th’offender’s scourge is weigh’d,
But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even, This sudden sending
him away must seem Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown By
desperate appliance are reliev’d, Or not at all.

 Enter Rosencrantz.

How now? What hath befall’n?

ROSENCRANTZ. Where the dead body is bestow’d, my lord, We cannot get
from him.

KING. But where is he?

ROSENCRANTZ. Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure.

KING. Bring him before us.

ROSENCRANTZ. Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.

 Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern.

KING. Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?

HAMLET. At supper.

KING. At supper? Where?

HAMLET. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain convocation
of politic worms are e’en at him. Your worm is your only emperor for
diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for
maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable
service,—two dishes, but to one table. That’s the end.

KING. Alas, alas!

HAMLET. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
of the fish that hath fed of that worm.

KING. What dost thou mean by this?

HAMLET. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
the guts of a beggar.

KING. Where is Polonius?

HAMLET. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
there, seek him i’ th’other place yourself. But indeed, if you find him
not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into
the lobby.

KING. [_To some Attendants._] Go seek him there.

HAMLET. He will stay till you come.

 [_Exeunt Attendants._]

KING. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,— Which we do
tender, as we dearly grieve For that which thou hast done,—must send
thee hence With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself; The bark is
ready, and the wind at help, Th’associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.

HAMLET. For England?

KING. Ay, Hamlet.

HAMLET. Good.

KING. So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.

HAMLET. I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for England!
Farewell, dear mother.

KING. Thy loving father, Hamlet.

HAMLET. My mother. Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England.

 [_Exit._]

KING. Follow him at foot. Tempt him with speed aboard; Delay it not;
I’ll have him hence tonight. Away, for everything is seal’d and done
That else leans on th’affair. Pray you make haste.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

And England, if my love thou hold’st at aught,— As my great power
thereof may give thee sense, Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe Pays homage to us,—thou mayst
not coldly set Our sovereign process, which imports at full, By letters
conjuring to that effect, The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;
For like the hectic in my blood he rages, And thou must cure me. Till I
know ’tis done, Howe’er my haps, my joys were ne’er begun.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. A plain in Denmark.

 Enter Fortinbras and Forces marching.

FORTINBRAS. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king. Tell him that
by his license, Fortinbras Craves the conveyance of a promis’d march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous. If that his Majesty would
aught with us, We shall express our duty in his eye; And let him know
so.

CAPTAIN. I will do’t, my lord.

FORTINBRAS. Go softly on.

 [_Exeunt all but the Captain._]

 Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern &c.

HAMLET. Good sir, whose powers are these?

CAPTAIN. They are of Norway, sir.

HAMLET. How purpos’d, sir, I pray you?

CAPTAIN. Against some part of Poland.

HAMLET. Who commands them, sir?

CAPTAIN. The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

HAMLET. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir, Or for some frontier?

CAPTAIN. Truly to speak, and with no addition, We go to gain a little
patch of ground That hath in it no profit but the name. To pay five
ducats, five, I would not farm it; Nor will it yield to Norway or the
Pole A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

HAMLET. Why, then the Polack never will defend it.

CAPTAIN. Yes, it is already garrison’d.

HAMLET. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats Will not debate
the question of this straw! This is th’imposthume of much wealth and
peace, That inward breaks, and shows no cause without Why the man dies.
I humbly thank you, sir.

CAPTAIN. God b’ wi’ you, sir.

 [_Exit._]

ROSENCRANTZ. Will’t please you go, my lord?

HAMLET. I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.

 [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

How all occasions do inform against me, And spur my dull revenge. What
is a man If his chief good and market of his time Be but to sleep and
feed? A beast, no more. Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and godlike
reason To fust in us unus’d. Now whether it be Bestial oblivion, or
some craven scruple Of thinking too precisely on th’event,— A thought
which, quarter’d, hath but one part wisdom And ever three parts
coward,—I do not know Why yet I live to say this thing’s to do, Sith I
have cause, and will, and strength, and means To do’t. Examples gross
as earth exhort me, Witness this army of such mass and charge, Led by a
delicate and tender prince, Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff’d,
Makes mouths at the invisible event, Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare, Even for an eggshell.
Rightly to be great Is not to stir without great argument, But greatly
to find quarrel in a straw When honour’s at the stake. How stand I
then, That have a father kill’d, a mother stain’d, Excitements of my
reason and my blood, And let all sleep, while to my shame I see The
imminent death of twenty thousand men That, for a fantasy and trick of
fame, Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot Whereon the
numbers cannot try the cause, Which is not tomb enough and continent To
hide the slain? O, from this time forth, My thoughts be bloody or be
nothing worth.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE V. Elsinore. A room in the Castle.

 Enter Queen, Horatio and a Gentleman.

QUEEN. I will not speak with her.

GENTLEMAN. She is importunate, indeed distract. Her mood will needs be
pitied.

QUEEN. What would she have?

GENTLEMAN. She speaks much of her f