You will
do’t, sir, really.

HAMLET. What imports the nomination of this gentleman?

OSRIC. Of Laertes?

HORATIO. His purse is empty already, all’s golden words are spent.

HAMLET. Of him, sir.

OSRIC. I know you are not ignorant,—

HAMLET. I would you did, sir; yet in faith if you did, it would not
much approve me. Well, sir?

OSRIC. You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is,—

HAMLET. I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in
excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.

OSRIC. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him,
by them in his meed he’s unfellowed.

HAMLET. What’s his weapon?

OSRIC. Rapier and dagger.

HAMLET. That’s two of his weapons. But well.

OSRIC. The King, sir, hath wager’d with him six Barbary horses, against
the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and
poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the
hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.

HAMLET. What call you the carriages?

HORATIO. I knew you must be edified by the margin ere you had done.

OSRIC. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

HAMLET. The phrase would be more german to the matter if we could carry
cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three
liberal conceited carriages: that’s the French bet against the Danish.
Why is this all imponed, as you call it?

OSRIC. The King, sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes between you and
him, he shall not exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine. And it would come to immediate trial if your lordship would
vouchsafe the answer.

HAMLET. How if I answer no?

OSRIC. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.

HAMLET. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty, it
is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be brought, the
gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose, I will win for him if
I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.

OSRIC. Shall I re-deliver you e’en so?

HAMLET. To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.

OSRIC. I commend my duty to your lordship.

HAMLET. Yours, yours.

 [_Exit Osric._]

He does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues else for’s
turn.

HORATIO. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.

HAMLET. He did comply with his dug before he suck’d it. Thus has
he,—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
on,— only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a
kind of yeasty collection, which carries them through and through the
most fanned and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial,
the bubbles are out,

 Enter a Lord.

LORD. My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who
brings back to him that you attend him in the hall. He sends to know if
your pleasure hold to play with Laertes or that you will take longer
time.

HAMLET. I am constant to my purposes, they follow the King’s pleasure.
If his fitness speaks, mine is ready. Now or whensoever, provided I be
so able as now.

LORD. The King and Queen and all are coming down.

HAMLET. In happy time.

LORD. The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes
before you fall to play.

HAMLET. She well instructs me.

 [_Exit Lord._]

HORATIO. You will lose this wager, my lord.

HAMLET. I do not think so. Since he went into France, I have been in
continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think
how ill all’s here about my heart: but it is no matter.

HORATIO. Nay, good my lord.

HAMLET. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving as
would perhaps trouble a woman.

HORATIO. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
repair hither, and say you are not fit.

HAMLET. Not a whit, we defy augury. There’s a special providence in the
fall of a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to
come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The readiness
is all. Since no man has aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave
betimes?

 Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords, Osric and Attendants with foils &c.

KING. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.

 [_The King puts Laertes’s hand into Hamlet’s._]

HAMLET. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong; But pardon’t
as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, and you must needs have
heard, How I am punish’d with sore distraction. What I have done That
might your nature, honour, and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim
was madness. Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet. If Hamlet from
himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it. Who does it, then? His
madness. If’t be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d; His
madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy. Sir, in this audience, Let my
disclaiming from a purpos’d evil Free me so far in your most generous
thoughts That I have shot my arrow o’er the house And hurt my brother.

LAERTES. I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive in this case should
stir me most To my revenge. But in my terms of honour I stand aloof,
and will no reconcilement Till by some elder masters of known honour I
have a voice and precedent of peace To keep my name ungor’d. But till
that time I do receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong
it.

HAMLET. I embrace it freely, And will this brother’s wager frankly
play.— Give us the foils; come on.

LAERTES. Come, one for me.

HAMLET. I’ll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance Your skill shall
like a star i’ th’ darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.

LAERTES. You mock me, sir.

HAMLET. No, by this hand.

KING. Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet, You know the
wager?

HAMLET. Very well, my lord. Your Grace has laid the odds o’ the weaker
side.

KING. I do not fear it. I have seen you both; But since he is better’d,
we have therefore odds.

LAERTES. This is too heavy. Let me see another.

HAMLET. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

 [_They prepare to play._]

OSRIC. Ay, my good lord.

KING. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the
first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all
the battlements their ordnance fire; The King shall drink to Hamlet’s
better breath, And in the cup an union shall he throw Richer than that
which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the
cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the
cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,
‘Now the King drinks to Hamlet.’ Come, begin. And you, the judges, bear
a wary eye.

HAMLET. Come on, sir.

LAERTES. Come, my lord.

 [_They play._]

HAMLET. One.

LAERTES. No.

HAMLET. Judgment.

OSRIC. A hit, a very palpable hit.

LAERTES. Well; again.

KING. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine; Here’s to thy
health.

 [_Trumpets sound, and cannon shot off within._]

Give him the cup.

HAMLET. I’ll play this bout first; set it by awhile.

 [_They play._]

Come. Another hit; what say you?


LAERTES. A touch, a touch, I do confess.

KING. Our son shall win.

QUEEN. He’s fat, and scant of breath. Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub
thy brows. The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

HAMLET. Good madam.

KING. Gertrude, do not drink.

QUEEN. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.

KING. [_Aside._] It is the poison’d cup; it is too late.

HAMLET. I dare not drink yet, madam. By and by.

QUEEN. Come, let me wipe thy face.

LAERTES. My lord, I’ll hit him now.

KING. I do not think’t.

LAERTES. [_Aside._] And yet ’tis almost ’gainst my conscience.

HAMLET. Come for the third, Laertes. You d