rrow Conjures the wand’ring stars, and makes them
stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane. [_Leaps
into the grave._]

LAERTES. [_Grappling with him._] The devil take thy soul!

HAMLET. Thou pray’st not well. I prythee take thy fingers from my
throat; For though I am not splenative and rash, Yet have I in me
something dangerous, Which let thy wiseness fear. Away thy hand!

KING. Pluck them asunder.

QUEEN. Hamlet! Hamlet!

All. Gentlemen!

HORATIO. Good my lord, be quiet.

 [_The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave._]

HAMLET. Why, I will fight with him upon this theme Until my eyelids
will no longer wag.

QUEEN. O my son, what theme?

HAMLET. I lov’d Ophelia; forty thousand brothers Could not, with all
their quantity of love, Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

KING. O, he is mad, Laertes.

QUEEN. For love of God forbear him!

HAMLET. ’Swounds, show me what thou’lt do: Woul’t weep? woul’t fight?
woul’t fast? woul’t tear thyself? Woul’t drink up eisel? eat a
crocodile? I’ll do’t. Dost thou come here to whine? To outface me with
leaping in her grave? Be buried quick with her, and so will I. And if
thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till
our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like
a wart. Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.

QUEEN. This is mere madness: And thus awhile the fit will work on him;
Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are
disclos’d, His silence will sit drooping.

HAMLET. Hear you, sir; What is the reason that you use me thus? I lov’d
you ever. But it is no matter. Let Hercules himself do what he may, The
cat will mew, and dog will have his day.

 [_Exit._]

KING. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.

 [_Exit Horatio._]

[_To Laertes_] Strengthen your patience in our last night’s speech;
We’ll put the matter to the present push.— Good Gertrude, set some
watch over your son. This grave shall have a living monument. An hour
of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then in patience our proceeding be.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A hall in the Castle.

 Enter Hamlet and Horatio.

HAMLET. So much for this, sir. Now let me see the other; You do
remember all the circumstance?

HORATIO. Remember it, my lord!

HAMLET. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting That would not
let me sleep. Methought I lay Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes.
Rashly, And prais’d be rashness for it,—let us know, Our indiscretion
sometime serves us well, When our deep plots do pall; and that should
teach us There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we
will.

HORATIO. That is most certain.

HAMLET. Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark
Grop’d I to find out them; had my desire, Finger’d their packet, and in
fine, withdrew To mine own room again, making so bold, My fears
forgetting manners, to unseal Their grand commission; where I found,
Horatio, Oh royal knavery! an exact command, Larded with many several
sorts of reasons, Importing Denmark’s health, and England’s too, With
ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That on the supervise, no leisure
bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be
struck off.

HORATIO. Is’t possible?

HAMLET. Here’s the commission, read it at more leisure. But wilt thou
hear me how I did proceed?

HORATIO. I beseech you.

HAMLET. Being thus benetted round with villanies,— Or I could make a
prologue to my brains, They had begun the play,—I sat me down, Devis’d
a new commission, wrote it fair: I once did hold it, as our statists
do, A baseness to write fair, and labour’d much How to forget that
learning; but, sir, now It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know The
effect of what I wrote?

HORATIO. Ay, good my lord.

HAMLET. An earnest conjuration from the King, As England was his
faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween
their amities, And many such-like ‘as’es of great charge, That on the
view and know of these contents, Without debatement further, more or
less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time
allow’d.

HORATIO. How was this seal’d?

HAMLET. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my father’s signet
in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal: Folded the writ
up in the form of the other, Subscrib’d it: gave’t th’impression;
plac’d it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our
sea-fight, and what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.

HORATIO. So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to’t.

HAMLET. Why, man, they did make love to this employment. They are not
near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow.
’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell
incensed points Of mighty opposites.

HORATIO. Why, what a king is this!

HAMLET. Does it not, thinks’t thee, stand me now upon,— He that hath
kill’d my king, and whor’d my mother, Popp’d in between th’election and
my hopes, Thrown out his angle for my proper life, And with such
cozenage—is’t not perfect conscience To quit him with this arm? And
is’t not to be damn’d To let this canker of our nature come In further
evil?

HORATIO. It must be shortly known to him from England What is the issue
of the business there.

HAMLET. It will be short. The interim is mine; And a man’s life’s no
more than to say ‘One’. But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to
Laertes I forgot myself; For by the image of my cause I see The
portraiture of his. I’ll court his favours. But sure the bravery of his
grief did put me Into a tow’ring passion.

HORATIO. Peace, who comes here?

 Enter Osric.

OSRIC. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.

HAMLET. I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this waterfly?

HORATIO. No, my good lord.

HAMLET. Thy state is the more gracious; for ’tis a vice to know him. He
hath much land, and fertile; let a beast be lord of beasts, and his
crib shall stand at the king’s mess; ’tis a chough; but, as I say,
spacious in the possession of dirt.

OSRIC. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart a
thing to you from his Majesty.

HAMLET. I will receive it with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet
to his right use; ’tis for the head.

OSRIC. I thank your lordship, ’tis very hot.

HAMLET. No, believe me, ’tis very cold, the wind is northerly.

OSRIC. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

HAMLET. Methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.

OSRIC. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry,—as ’twere—I cannot tell
how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid
a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter,—

HAMLET. I beseech you, remember,—

 [_Hamlet moves him to put on his hat._]

OSRIC. Nay, in good faith; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of
most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of
gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of what part a
gentleman would see.

HAMLET. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, though I know,
to divide him inventorially would dizzy th’arithmetic of memory, and
yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity
of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article and his infusion
of such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his
semblable is his mirror and who else would trace him his umbrage,
nothing more.

OSRIC. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

HAMLET. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
rawer breath?

OSRIC. Sir?

HORATIO. Is’t not possible to understand in another tongue? 