t
you both That, being of so young days brought up with him, And since so
neighbour’d to his youth and humour, That you vouchsafe your rest here
in our court Some little time, so by your companies To draw him on to
pleasures and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus That, open’d, lies within
our remedy.

QUEEN. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you, And sure I am, two
men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us
awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall
receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ. Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have
of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN. We both obey, And here give up ourselves, in the full
bent, To lay our service freely at your feet To be commanded.

KING. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz. And I beseech you
instantly to visit My too much changed son. Go, some of you, And bring
these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN. Heavens make our presence and our practices Pleasant and
helpful to him.

QUEEN. Ay, amen.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and some Attendants._]

 Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS. Th’ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully
return’d.

KING. Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS. Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege, I hold my duty,
as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious King: And I do
think,—or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath us’d to do—that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s
lunacy.

KING. O speak of that, that do I long to hear.

POLONIUS. Give first admittance to th’ambassadors; My news shall be the
fruit to that great feast.

KING. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.

 [_Exit Polonius._]

He tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath found The head and source of
all your son’s distemper.

QUEEN. I doubt it is no other but the main, His father’s death and our
o’erhasty marriage.

KING. Well, we shall sift him.

 Enter Polonius with Voltemand and Cornelius.

Welcome, my good friends! Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND. Most fair return of greetings and desires. Upon our first,
he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies, which to him appear’d To
be a preparation ’gainst the Polack; But better look’d into, he truly
found It was against your Highness; whereat griev’d, That so his
sickness, age, and impotence Was falsely borne in hand, sends out
arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys, Receives rebuke from
Norway; and in fine, Makes vow before his uncle never more To give
th’assay of arms against your Majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome
with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his
commission to employ those soldiers So levied as before, against the
Polack: With an entreaty, herein further shown, [_Gives a paper._] That
it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this
enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set
down.

KING. It likes us well; And at our more consider’d time we’ll read,
Answer, and think upon this business. Meantime we thank you for your
well-took labour. Go to your rest, at night we’ll feast together:. Most
welcome home.

 [_Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius._]

POLONIUS. This business is well ended. My liege and madam, to
expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night
night, and time is time. Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs
and outward flourishes, I will be brief. Your noble son is mad. Mad
call I it; for to define true madness, What is’t but to be nothing else
but mad? But let that go.

QUEEN. More matter, with less art.

POLONIUS. Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis
true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true. A foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him then. And
now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say,
the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend, I have a
daughter—have whilst she is mine— Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise. [_Reads._] _To the
celestial, and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia_— That’s an
ill phrase, a vile phrase; ‘beautified’ is a vile phrase: but you shall
hear. [_Reads._] _these; in her excellent white bosom, these, &c._

QUEEN. Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS. Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful. [_Reads._]
_Doubt thou the stars are fire, Doubt that the sun doth move, Doubt
truth to be a liar, But never doubt I love. O dear Ophelia, I am ill at
these numbers. I have not art to reckon my groans. But that I love thee
best, O most best, believe it. Adieu. Thine evermore, most dear lady,
whilst this machine is to him, HAMLET._ This in obedience hath my
daughter show’d me; And more above, hath his solicitings, As they fell
out by time, by means, and place, All given to mine ear.

KING. But how hath she receiv’d his love?

POLONIUS. What do you think of me?

KING. As of a man faithful and honourable.

POLONIUS. I would fain prove so. But what might you think, When I had
seen this hot love on the wing, As I perceiv’d it, I must tell you
that, Before my daughter told me, what might you, Or my dear Majesty
your queen here, think, If I had play’d the desk or table-book, Or
given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or look’d upon this love with
idle sight, What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my
young mistress thus I did bespeak: ‘Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy
star. This must not be.’ And then I precepts gave her, That she should
lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice, And he, repulsed,—a short
tale to make— Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch,
thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we wail for.

KING. Do you think ’tis this?

QUEEN. It may be, very likely.

POLONIUS. Hath there been such a time, I’d fain know that, That I have
positively said ‘’Tis so,’ When it prov’d otherwise?

KING. Not that I know.

POLONIUS. Take this from this, if this be otherwise. [_Points to his
head and shoulder._] If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth
is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the centre.

KING. How may we try it further?

POLONIUS. You know sometimes he walks four hours together Here in the
lobby.

QUEEN. So he does indeed.

POLONIUS. At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him. Be you and I
behind an arras then, Mark the encounter. If he love her not, And be
not from his reason fall’n thereon, Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING. We will try it.

 Enter Hamlet, reading.

QUEEN. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.

POLONIUS. Away, I do beseech you, both away I’ll board him presently.
O, give me leave.

 [_Exeunt King, Queen and Attendants._]

How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET. Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS. Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET. Excellent well. You’re a fishmonger.

POLONIUS. Not I, my lord.

HAMLET. Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS. Honest, my lord?

HAMLET. Ay sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
picked out of ten thousand.

POLONIUS. That’s very true, my lord.

HAMLET. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good
kissing carrion,— Have you a daughter?

POLONIUS. I h