al groan.

KING. Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage; For we will fetters
put upon this fear, Which now goes too free-footed.

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. We will haste us.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

 Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS. My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet. Behind the arras
I’ll convey myself To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax him
home, And as you said, and wisely was it said, ’Tis meet that some more
audience than a mother, Since nature makes them partial, should
o’erhear The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege, I’ll call upon
you ere you go to bed, And tell you what I know.

KING. Thanks, dear my lord.

 [_Exit Polonius._]

O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven; It hath the primal eldest
curse upon’t,— A brother’s murder! Pray can I not, Though inclination
be as sharp as will: My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, And,
like a man to double business bound, I stand in pause where I shall
first begin, And both neglect. What if this cursed hand Were thicker
than itself with brother’s blood, Is there not rain enough in the sweet
heavens To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy But to confront
the visage of offence? And what’s in prayer but this twofold force, To
be forestalled ere we come to fall, Or pardon’d being down? Then I’ll
look up. My fault is past. But O, what form of prayer Can serve my
turn? Forgive me my foul murder! That cannot be; since I am still
possess’d Of those effects for which I did the murder,— My crown, mine
own ambition, and my queen. May one be pardon’d and retain th’offence?
In the corrupted currents of this world Offence’s gilded hand may shove
by justice, And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself Buys out the law.
But ’tis not so above; There is no shuffling, there the action lies In
his true nature, and we ourselves compell’d Even to the teeth and
forehead of our faults, To give in evidence. What then? What rests? Try
what repentance can. What can it not? Yet what can it, when one cannot
repent? O wretched state! O bosom black as death! O limed soul, that
struggling to be free, Art more engag’d! Help, angels! Make assay: Bow,
stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel, Be soft as sinews of
the new-born babe. All may be well.

 [_Retires and kneels._]

 Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying. And now I’ll do’t.
And so he goes to heaven; And so am I reveng’d. That would be scann’d:
A villain kills my father, and for that I, his sole son, do this same
villain send To heaven. O, this is hire and salary, not revenge. He
took my father grossly, full of bread, With all his crimes broad blown,
as flush as May; And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven? But
in our circumstance and course of thought, ’Tis heavy with him. And am
I then reveng’d, To take him in the purging of his soul, When he is fit
and season’d for his passage? No. Up, sword, and know thou a more
horrid hent: When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage, Or in
th’incestuous pleasure of his bed, At gaming, swearing; or about some
act That has no relish of salvation in’t, Then trip him, that his heels
may kick at heaven, And that his soul may be as damn’d and black As
hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays. This physic but prolongs thy
sickly days.

 [_Exit._]

 The King rises and advances.

KING. My words fly up, my thoughts remain below. Words without thoughts
never to heaven go.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Another room in the Castle.

 Enter Queen and Polonius.

POLONIUS. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him, Tell him his
pranks have been too broad to bear with, And that your Grace hath
screen’d and stood between Much heat and him. I’ll silence me e’en
here. Pray you be round with him.

HAMLET. [_Within._] Mother, mother, mother.

QUEEN. I’ll warrant you, Fear me not. Withdraw, I hear him coming.

 [_Polonius goes behind the arras._]

 Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET. Now, mother, what’s the matter?

QUEEN. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET. Mother, you have my father much offended.

QUEEN. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

HAMLET. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

QUEEN. Why, how now, Hamlet?

HAMLET. What’s the matter now?

QUEEN. Have you forgot me?

HAMLET. No, by the rood, not so. You are the Queen, your husband’s
brother’s wife, And, would it were not so. You are my mother.

QUEEN. Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.

HAMLET. Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge. You go not
till I set you up a glass Where you may see the inmost part of you.

QUEEN. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me? Help, help, ho!

POLONIUS. [_Behind._] What, ho! help, help, help!

HAMLET. How now? A rat? [_Draws._] Dead for a ducat, dead!

 [_Makes a pass through the arras._]

POLONIUS. [_Behind._] O, I am slain!

 [_Falls and dies._]

QUEEN. O me, what hast thou done?

HAMLET. Nay, I know not. is it the King?

 [_Draws forth Polonius._]

QUEEN. O what a rash and bloody deed is this!

HAMLET. A bloody deed. Almost as bad, good mother, As kill a king and
marry with his brother.

QUEEN. As kill a king?

HAMLET. Ay, lady, ’twas my word.— [_To Polonius._] Thou wretched, rash,
intruding fool, farewell! I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune,
Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.— Leave wringing of your
hands. Peace, sit you down, And let me wring your heart, for so I
shall, If it be made of penetrable stuff; If damned custom have not
braz’d it so, That it is proof and bulwark against sense.

QUEEN. What have I done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue In noise so
rude against me?

HAMLET. Such an act That blurs the grace and blush of modesty, Calls
virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose From the fair forehead of an
innocent love, And sets a blister there. Makes marriage vows As false
as dicers’ oaths. O such a deed As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes A rhapsody of words. Heaven’s
face doth glow, Yea this solidity and compound mass, With tristful
visage, as against the doom, Is thought-sick at the act.

QUEEN. Ay me, what act, That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?

HAMLET. Look here upon this picture, and on this, The counterfeit
presentment of two brothers. See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself, An eye like Mars, to
threaten and command, A station like the herald Mercury New lighted on
a heaven-kissing hill: A combination and a form indeed, Where every god
did seem to set his seal, To give the world assurance of a man. This
was your husband. Look you now what follows. Here is your husband, like
a mildew’d ear Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes? Could you
on this fair mountain leave to feed, And batten on this moor? Ha! have
you eyes? You cannot call it love; for at your age The hey-day in the
blood is tame, it’s humble, And waits upon the judgment: and what
judgment Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have, Else could
you not have motion; but sure that sense Is apoplex’d, for madness
would not err Nor sense to ecstacy was ne’er so thrall’d But it
reserv’d some quantity of choice To serve in such a difference. What
devil was’t That thus hath cozen’d you at hoodman-blind? Eyes without
feeling, feeling without sight, Ears without hands or eyes, smelling
sans all, Or but a sickly part of one true sense Could not so mope. O
shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell, If thou canst mutine in a
matron’s bones, To flaming youth let virtue be as wax, And melt in her
own fire. Proclaim no shame When the compulsive ardour gives the
charge, Since frost itself as actively doth burn, And reason panders
will.

QUEEN. O Hamlet, speak no more. Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very
soul, And there I see such black and grained spots As will not leave
their tinct.

HAMLET. Nay, but to live In the rank sw