ave, my lord.

HAMLET. Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to’t.

POLONIUS. How say you by that? [_Aside._] Still harping on my daughter.
Yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger. He is far
gone, far gone. And truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for
love; very near this. I’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my
lord?

HAMLET. Words, words, words.

POLONIUS. What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET. Between who?

POLONIUS. I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET. Slanders, sir. For the satirical slave says here that old men
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging
thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams. All which, sir, though I most
powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it
thus set down. For you yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a
crab you could go backward.

POLONIUS. [_Aside._] Though this be madness, yet there is a method
in’t.— Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET. Into my grave?

POLONIUS. Indeed, that is out o’ the air. [_Aside._] How pregnant
sometimes his replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on,
which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him
and my daughter. My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave
of you.

HAMLET. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
willingly part withal, except my life, except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS. Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET. These tedious old fools.

 Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

POLONIUS. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.

ROSENCRANTZ. [_To Polonius._] God save you, sir.

 [_Exit Polonius._]

GUILDENSTERN. My honoured lord!

ROSENCRANTZ. My most dear lord!

HAMLET. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
Rosencrantz. Good lads, how do ye both?

ROSENCRANTZ. As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN. Happy in that we are not over-happy; On Fortune’s cap we
are not the very button.

HAMLET. Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ. Neither, my lord.

HAMLET. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?

GUILDENSTERN. Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET. In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true; she is a
strumpet. What’s the news?

ROSENCRANTZ. None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.

HAMLET. Then is doomsday near. But your news is not true. Let me
question more in particular. What have you, my good friends, deserved
at the hands of Fortune, that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN. Prison, my lord?

HAMLET. Denmark’s a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ. Then is the world one.

HAMLET. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
dungeons, Denmark being one o’ th’ worst.

ROSENCRANTZ. We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET. Why, then ’tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or
bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ. Why, then your ambition makes it one; ’tis too narrow for
your mind.

HAMLET. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a
king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN. Which dreams, indeed, are ambition; for the very
substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET. A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality
that it is but a shadow’s shadow.

HAMLET. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch’d
heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay, I
cannot reason.

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. We’ll wait upon you.

HAMLET. No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my
servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully
attended. But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ. To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you.
And sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you
not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
deal justly with me. Come, come; nay, speak.

GUILDENSTERN. What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET. Why, anything. But to the purpose. You were sent for; and there
is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have not
craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen have sent for
you.

ROSENCRANTZ. To what end, my lord?

HAMLET. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights
of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of
our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could
charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent
for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ. [_To Guildenstern._] What say you?

HAMLET. [_Aside._] Nay, then I have an eye of you. If you love me, hold
not off.

GUILDENSTERN. My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your
discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no feather. I
have of late, but wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition
that this goodly frame the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory;
this most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it
appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of
vapours. What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason? How infinite
in faculties, in form and moving, how express and admirable? In action
how like an angel? In apprehension, how like a god? The beauty of the
world, the paragon of animals. And yet, to me, what is this
quintessence of dust? Man delights not me; no, nor woman neither,
though by your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.

HAMLET. Why did you laugh then, when I said ‘Man delights not me’?

ROSENCRANTZ. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what Lenten
entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them on the
way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET. He that plays the king shall be welcome,—his Majesty shall have
tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target;
the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle a’ th’
sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for’t. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ. Even those you were wont to take such delight in—the
tragedians of the city.

HAMLET. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in reputation
and profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
innovation.

HAMLET. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
city? Are they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ. No, indeed, they are not.

HAMLET. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there
is, sir, an ayry of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of
question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t. These are now the
fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many
wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come
thither.

HAMLET. What, are they children? Who maintains ’em? How are they
escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing?
Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players—as it is most like, if their means are no better—their writers
do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ. Faith, th