t out of this, my lord?

KING. Laertes, was your father dear to you? Or are you like the
painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart?

LAERTES. Why ask you this?

KING. Not that I think you did not love your father, But that I know
love is begun by time, And that I see, in passages of proof, Time
qualifies the spark and fire of it. There lives within the very flame
of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it; And nothing is at a
like goodness still, For goodness, growing to a pleurisy, Dies in his
own too much. That we would do, We should do when we would; for this
‘would’ changes, And hath abatements and delays as many As there are
tongues, are hands, are accidents; And then this ‘should’ is like a
spendthrift sigh That hurts by easing. But to the quick o’ th’ulcer:
Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake To show yourself your
father’s son in deed, More than in words?

LAERTES. To cut his throat i’ th’ church.

KING. No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize; Revenge should have
no bounds. But good Laertes, Will you do this, keep close within your
chamber. Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home: We’ll put on
those shall praise your excellence, And set a double varnish on the
fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together And wager on
your heads. He, being remiss, Most generous, and free from all
contriving, Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease, Or with a
little shuffling, you may choose A sword unbated, and in a pass of
practice, Requite him for your father.

LAERTES. I will do’t. And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword. I
bought an unction of a mountebank So mortal that, but dip a knife in
it, Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare, Collected from all
simples that have virtue Under the moon, can save the thing from death
This is but scratch’d withal. I’ll touch my point With this contagion,
that if I gall him slightly, It may be death.

KING. Let’s further think of this, Weigh what convenience both of time
and means May fit us to our shape. If this should fail, And that our
drift look through our bad performance. ’Twere better not assay’d.
Therefore this project Should have a back or second, that might hold If
this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see. We’ll make a solemn wager on
your cunnings,— I ha’t! When in your motion you are hot and dry, As
make your bouts more violent to that end, And that he calls for drink,
I’ll have prepar’d him A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping, If
he by chance escape your venom’d stuck, Our purpose may hold there.

 Enter Queen.

How now, sweet Queen?

QUEEN. One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow.
Your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.

LAERTES. Drown’d! O, where?

QUEEN. There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoary
leaves in the glassy stream. There with fantastic garlands did she make
Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples, That liberal
shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers
call them. There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds Clamb’ring to
hang, an envious sliver broke, When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide, And mermaid-like,
awhile they bore her up, Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and
indued Unto that element. But long it could not be Till that her
garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her
melodious lay To muddy death.

LAERTES. Alas, then she is drown’d?

QUEEN. Drown’d, drown’d.

LAERTES. Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I
forbid my tears. But yet It is our trick; nature her custom holds, Let
shame say what it will. When these are gone, The woman will be out.
Adieu, my lord, I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze, But
that this folly douts it.

 [_Exit._]

KING. Let’s follow, Gertrude; How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again; Therefore let’s follow.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT V

SCENE I. A churchyard.

 Enter two Clowns with spades, &c.

FIRST CLOWN. Is she to be buried in Christian burial, when she wilfully
seeks her own salvation?

SECOND CLOWN. I tell thee she is, and therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.

FIRST CLOWN. How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own
defence?

SECOND CLOWN. Why, ’tis found so.

FIRST CLOWN. It must be _se offendendo_, it cannot be else. For here
lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an
act hath three branches. It is to act, to do, and to perform: argal,
she drowned herself wittingly.

SECOND CLOWN. Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,—

FIRST CLOWN. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will
he nill he, he goes,—mark you that. But if the water come to him and
drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not guilty of his
own death shortens not his own life.

SECOND CLOWN. But is this law?

FIRST CLOWN. Ay, marry, is’t, crowner’s quest law.

SECOND CLOWN. Will you ha’ the truth on’t? If this had not been a
gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.

FIRST CLOWN. Why, there thou say’st. And the more pity that great folk
should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more
than their even Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient
gentlemen but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up
Adam’s profession.

SECOND CLOWN. Was he a gentleman?

FIRST CLOWN. He was the first that ever bore arms.

SECOND CLOWN. Why, he had none.

FIRST CLOWN. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the
Scripture? The Scripture says Adam digg’d. Could he dig without arms?
I’ll put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself—

SECOND CLOWN. Go to.

FIRST CLOWN. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
shipwright, or the carpenter?

SECOND CLOWN. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand
tenants.

FIRST CLOWN. I like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows does well.
But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost
ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To’t again, come.

SECOND CLOWN. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
carpenter?

FIRST CLOWN. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

SECOND CLOWN. Marry, now I can tell.

FIRST CLOWN. To’t.

SECOND CLOWN. Mass, I cannot tell.

 Enter Hamlet and Horatio, at a distance.

FIRST CLOWN. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
not mend his pace with beating; and when you are asked this question
next, say ‘a grave-maker’. The houses he makes last till doomsday. Go,
get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of liquor.

 [_Exit Second Clown._]

[_Digs and sings._]

   In youth when I did love, did love, Methought it was very sweet; To
   contract, O, the time for, a, my behove, O methought there was
   nothing meet.

HAMLET. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
grave-making?

HORATIO. Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.

HAMLET. ’Tis e’en so; the hand of little employment hath the daintier
sense.

FIRST CLOWN. [_Sings._] But age with his stealing steps Hath claw’d me
in his clutch, And hath shipp’d me into the land, As if I had never
been such.

 [_Throws up a skull._]

HAMLET. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
knave jowls it to th’ ground, as if ’twere Cain’s jawbone, that did the
first murder! This might be the pate of a politician which this ass now
o’er-offices, one that would circumvent God, might it not?

HORATIO. It might, my lord.

HAMLET. Or of a courtier, which could say ‘Good morrow, sweet lord! H