eat of an enseamed bed, Stew’d
in corruption, honeying and making love Over the nasty sty.

QUEEN. O speak to me no more; These words like daggers enter in mine
ears; No more, sweet Hamlet.

HAMLET. A murderer and a villain; A slave that is not twentieth part
the tithe Of your precedent lord. A vice of kings, A cutpurse of the
empire and the rule, That from a shelf the precious diadem stole And
put it in his pocket!

QUEEN. No more.

HAMLET. A king of shreds and patches!—

 Enter Ghost.

Save me and hover o’er me with your wings, You heavenly guards! What
would your gracious figure?

QUEEN. Alas, he’s mad.

HAMLET. Do you not come your tardy son to chide, That, laps’d in time
and passion, lets go by The important acting of your dread command? O
say!

GHOST. Do not forget. This visitation Is but to whet thy almost blunted
purpose. But look, amazement on thy mother sits. O step between her and
her fighting soul. Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works. Speak to
her, Hamlet.

HAMLET. How is it with you, lady?

QUEEN. Alas, how is’t with you, That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
And with the incorporal air do hold discourse? Forth at your eyes your
spirits wildly peep, And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm, Your
bedded hairs, like life in excrements, Start up and stand an end. O
gentle son, Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper Sprinkle cool
patience. Whereon do you look?

HAMLET. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares, His form and cause
conjoin’d, preaching to stones, Would make them capable.—Do not look
upon me, Lest with this piteous action you convert My stern effects.
Then what I have to do Will want true colour; tears perchance for
blood.

QUEEN. To whom do you speak this?

HAMLET. Do you see nothing there?

QUEEN. Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

HAMLET. Nor did you nothing hear?

QUEEN. No, nothing but ourselves.

HAMLET. Why, look you there! look how it steals away! My father, in his
habit as he liv’d! Look where he goes even now out at the portal.

 [_Exit Ghost._]

QUEEN. This is the very coinage of your brain. This bodiless creation
ecstasy Is very cunning in.

HAMLET. Ecstasy! My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time, And
makes as healthful music. It is not madness That I have utter’d. Bring
me to the test, And I the matter will re-word; which madness Would
gambol from. Mother, for love of grace, Lay not that flattering unction
to your soul That not your trespass, but my madness speaks. It will but
skin and film the ulcerous place, Whilst rank corruption, mining all
within, Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven, Repent what’s past,
avoid what is to come; And do not spread the compost on the weeds, To
make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue; For in the fatness of
these pursy times Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, Yea, curb and
woo for leave to do him good.

QUEEN. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.

HAMLET. O throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the
other half. Good night. But go not to mine uncle’s bed. Assume a
virtue, if you have it not. That monster custom, who all sense doth
eat, Of habits evil, is angel yet in this, That to the use of actions
fair and good He likewise gives a frock or livery That aptly is put on.
Refrain tonight, And that shall lend a kind of easiness To the next
abstinence. The next more easy; For use almost can change the stamp of
nature, And either curb the devil, or throw him out With wondrous
potency. Once more, good night, And when you are desirous to be bles’d,
I’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord [_Pointing to Polonius._]
I do repent; but heaven hath pleas’d it so, To punish me with this, and
this with me, That I must be their scourge and minister. I will bestow
him, and will answer well The death I gave him. So again, good night. I
must be cruel, only to be kind: Thus bad begins, and worse remains
behind. One word more, good lady.

QUEEN. What shall I do?

HAMLET. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do: Let the bloat King
tempt you again to bed, Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses, Or paddling in your neck with
his damn’d fingers, Make you to ravel all this matter out, That I
essentially am not in madness, But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let
him know, For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise, Would from a
paddock, from a bat, a gib, Such dear concernings hide? Who would do
so? No, in despite of sense and secrecy, Unpeg the basket on the
house’s top, Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, To try
conclusions, in the basket creep And break your own neck down.

QUEEN. Be thou assur’d, if words be made of breath, And breath of life,
I have no life to breathe What thou hast said to me.

HAMLET. I must to England, you know that?

QUEEN. Alack, I had forgot. ’Tis so concluded on.

HAMLET. There’s letters seal’d: and my two schoolfellows, Whom I will
trust as I will adders fang’d,— They bear the mandate, they must sweep
my way And marshal me to knavery. Let it work; For ’tis the sport to
have the enginer Hoist with his own petard, and ’t shall go hard But I
will delve one yard below their mines And blow them at the moon. O,
’tis most sweet, When in one line two crafts directly meet. This man
shall set me packing. I’ll lug the guts into the neighbour room.
Mother, good night. Indeed, this counsellor Is now most still, most
secret, and most grave, Who was in life a foolish peating knave. Come,
sir, to draw toward an end with you. Good night, mother.

 [_Exit Hamlet dragging out Polonius._]



ACT IV

SCENE I. A room in the Castle.

 Enter King, Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

KING. There’s matter in these sighs. These profound heaves You must
translate. ’tis fit we understand them. Where is your son?

QUEEN. Bestow this place on us a little while.

 [_To Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, who go out._]

Ah, my good lord, what have I seen tonight!

KING. What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

QUEEN. Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend Which is the
mightier. In his lawless fit Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries ‘A rat, a rat!’ And in this brainish
apprehension kills The unseen good old man.

KING. O heavy deed! It had been so with us, had we been there. His
liberty is full of threats to all; To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer’d? It will be laid to us,
whose providence Should have kept short, restrain’d, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love We would not understand
what was most fit, But like the owner of a foul disease, To keep it
from divulging, let it feed Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

QUEEN. To draw apart the body he hath kill’d, O’er whom his very
madness, like some ore Among a mineral of metals base, Shows itself
pure. He weeps for what is done.

KING. O Gertrude, come away! The sun no sooner shall the mountains
touch But we will ship him hence, and this vile deed We must with all
our majesty and skill Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!

 Re-enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Friends both, go join you with some further aid: Hamlet in madness hath
Polonius slain, And from his mother’s closet hath he dragg’d him. Go
seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body Into the chapel. I pray
you haste in this.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends, And let them know
both what we mean to do And what’s untimely done, so haply slander,
Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter, As level as the cannon to his
blank, Transports his poison’d shot, may miss our name, And hit the
woundless air. O, come away! My soul is full of discord and dismay.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another room in the Castle.

 Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET. Safely stowed.

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. [_Within._] Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

HAMLET. What no